{{Vital article|topic=Technology|level=5|class=C}}
{{WikiProject Computing |class=B |importance=Top |hardware=y |hardware-importance=Top}}
{{Archive box|auto=yes}}

==Use of the first picture==
The first picture displayed in this article details the internal architecture of a router. It would be more useful if that picture is inserted in the article about [[router]]. [[User : Anoop anooprs]] 14:51, 04 November 2007 (GMT)

The picture clearly is inadequate: "An embedded system is a computer system with a dedicated function within a larger mechanical or electrical system". May I ask what the mechanical or electrical system is in which the router is embedded?   <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/89.246.191.23|89.246.191.23]] ([[User talk:89.246.191.23|talk]]) 21:02, 5 November 2013 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

The picture is clearly out of place here. An ADSL modem/router is not embedded in the sense the article explains. I took the image from the German Wikipedia so that it does not confuse readers unaware of the subject.--[[User:Sae1962|Sae1962]] ([[User talk:Sae1962|talk]]) 13:35, 17 January 2018 (UTC)

==Contradiction in list of example embedded systems==
The third paragraph explains that cell phones and handheld computers are not truly embedded systems, but the list of example embedded systems includes these items.  Also, by the same explanation of being too general in purpose, game consoles and PDAs probably don't qualify as embedded systems.
:Is it OK now? Please sign your discussion edits. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 15:59, 30 August 2007 (UTC)

==B Class==
How exciting! B class! Hm ... I wonder what it needs to be A class ... probably more references. "has some gaps or missing elements or references, needs editing for language usage and/or clarity, balance of content," Can't disagree with that. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 11:25, 28 July 2007 (UTC)

==Secondary Pages should be created==
This page is definately more organized than before, but the content is so superficial for many of the topics that it would not be a bad idea to link to secondary pages for many of them. For example, reliability in embedded systems could definately use its own page, as it is it gets a paragraph. Anyone with experience in ES will have to agree, the overall ES content in wikipedia is weak. While I don't advocate making this page into a WWII size megapage, I do think that many of the areas should have their own pages.  [[User:Thomaslw|Thomaslw]] 22:46, 21 February 2007 (UTC)
:Agreed. Reliability has more than one paragraph now though. If you have the knowledge to write the page, go ahead and do so! I would guess that it is quite a niche area. Plus it's the old problem of finding engineers who can write well :) [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 14:08, 23 February 2007 (UTC)

:: Yes, there are many whole books dedicated to the subject of Embedded Systems.  The majority of additional sub topics within Embedded Systems should probably be their own pages.  See the discussion below on debugging.  Are we really writing a book here? ;) [[User:EM1SS&CSE|EM1SS&amp;CSE]] 15:56, 23 February 2007 (UTC)

::: hehe yeah I don't advocate making a book, but it would be nice to see ES having its own section of wikipedia so to speak! Plus all of us in ES know how misunderstood our domain is. I mean people use cell phones, Ipods, berries, video game systems, whatever, and think it's some magic box. And then when you go 'oh I work in embedded systems' they give you a blank stare. "What's that?" You guys know what I mean! Anyway I would definately like to expand this section to contain comprehensive content for the major sections, and perhaps just enough detail to give experienced engineers enough of a background where they can go 'oh okay." As it is the only other major subpage I can find is RTOSes, or embedded OS, but there is just so much in embedded systems! [[User:Thomaslw|Thomaslw]] 23:35, 23 February 2007 (UTC)<small>—The preceding [[Wikipedia:Sign your posts on talk pages|unsigned]] comment was added by [[User:Thomaslw|Thomaslw]] ([[User talk:Thomaslw|talk]] • [[Special:Contributions/Thomaslw|contribs]]) 23:35, 23 February 2007 (UTC).</small><!-- HagermanBot Auto-Unsigned -->

:::: I'm not opposed in making this into a 'book' per se, might actual be a career enhancement.  ;)  I’m not sure we would all be able to agree on some of the terminology, as I’ve heard things differently in each industry involved with embedded systems.  I think it might be an interesting collaborative effort.  Plus having it in the open domain ensures it will be updated for more timely items as the industry changes. Who hates reading an outdated book? (raises hand). [[User:199.64.0.252|199.64.0.252]] 19:37, 26 February 2007 (UTC)
:::: Ok, looks like not too much interest in this regard. ;) How do you guys propose we break up the sections to more meaningful Wiki subjects? [[User:EM1SS&CSE|EM1SS&amp;CSE]] 15:34, 19 March 2007 (UTC)
::::: I dunno. I'm not sure this is all fit content for WP. Bearing in mind [[WP:NOT#IINFO]] perhaps we don't need much more because it starts to stray into training manuals and such.[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 09:47, 1 May 2007 (UTC)

== New External Link Suggestions ==

http://microcontrollershop.com/An%20Embedded%20Tools%20Introduction.php  Article on tools used to develop code for Embedded Systems
could also serve as a reference for some of the debugging/software sections of Wikipedia ES article.

http://www.ucpros.com/Newsletter.htm  - Embedded System News Digest, Embedded System Industry News in a concise format.

[[User:Cwatti|Cwatti]] ([[User talk:Cwatti|talk]]) 01:27, 26 June 2009 (UTC)

==Software vs hardware==
An "embedded system" is a bit of hardware that does something.  A "virtual machine" is a software programming concept. Maybe Java virtual machines are used to program embvedded systems, but at most shoulnd't that be mentioned under "software architectures", if at all?  And it needs a reference (and the rest of the article needs references). --[[User:Wtshymanski|Wtshymanski]] ([[User talk:Wtshymanski|talk]]) 16:19, 13 July 2011 (UTC)

== More specific than title ==

Shouldn't this article be titled "[[embedded computer system]]?".  I know there isn't much in the way of alternate usage of the term, but there's no point in the title being broader than what the article is discussing. [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 22:18, 2 August 2013 (UTC)

:I decided to go for [[WP:BRD]] rename since I will be linking more pages to this article. [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 22:27, 2 August 2013 (UTC)

::You could have waited more than a few minutes for a response.  A day or two is customary.
::Per [[WP:NAME]] the appropriate article title is the most commonly known name, not necessarily the most technically correct name.  If you can present evidence that ''embedded computer system'' is widely used, then the rename can remain.  Otherwise, it should be changed back.  —[[user:EncMstr|EncMstr]] ([[user talk:EncMstr|talk]]) 22:35, 2 August 2013 (UTC)
:::I have no evidence that either is the most commonly used. I don't know how to change it back. I know how to change it forward. Might I suggest "[[Embedded systems (computing)]]" ? [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 07:19, 3 August 2013 (UTC)
:::::Correction: It wouldn't need to be plural. The primary link could be "[[Embedded system (computing)]]" and the plural can direct to it. [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 07:24, 3 August 2013 (UTC)
::::::[[Embedded system (computing)]] might be appropriate if we had other articles about non-computing "embedded systems". (But even then, the computing sense would probably qualify as the [[WP:PTOPIC|primary topic]], with no disambiguation phrase required.) I have moved the page back to the more common name for now. [[User:Hqb|Hqb]] ([[User talk:Hqb|talk]]) 09:35, 10 August 2013 (UTC)

== Computer system vs system with a computing function ==

I think it's more accurate to say that an embedded system is a [[computer]] embedded in a [[system]] or embedded [[computing]] function within a system. Saying it's a computing system sounds like computing is its primary function. It's a lot like calling a car a "motor." [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 19:09, 10 August 2013 (UTC)
:It's a ''computer system'' (i.e., processor, memory, and I/O units, together with suitable software/[[firmware]]) that is embedded into some larger system, whose main purpose will usually be something other than computation. As far as I can tell, that's essentially what the current article lead is is saying. Note that the focus of the article is the embedded system itself, not on any larger system (such as a car) that it might be a part of. [[User:Hqb|Hqb]] ([[User talk:Hqb|talk]]) 21:28, 10 August 2013 (UTC)
::A general purpose computer is a computer system too, but it's distinguished from an embedded system. What's unique about an embedded system is that it's part of a larger system. [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 06:18, 11 August 2013 (UTC)
:::Well, that's arguably what "embedded" means. But it doesn't really have to be part of a larger ''system''. For example, a typical small [[router (computing)|router]] is little more than a computer with a larger-than-usual number of network interfaces. What makes it an embedded system is not so much that it's part of a larger system. but that it's performing a very specialized function – even though the hardware is often perfectly capable of running a full general-purpose operating system like [[Linux]] and a complement of apps. Likewise, a typical consumer [[GPS navigation device]] is essentially also just a small [[tablet computer]], only equipped with a GPS receiver, and constrained to run a particular map/navigation application. Again, I think the current version of the article lead explains the distinction quite well. [[User:Hqb|Hqb]] ([[User talk:Hqb|talk]]) 08:21, 11 August 2013 (UTC)
:::::So if I were to designate a general purpose computer to serve only one function (like streaming music), would it be an embedded system? [[User:Oicumayberight|Oicumayberight]] ([[User talk:Oicumayberight|talk]]) 18:07, 11 August 2013 (UTC)

== Proposed merge with [[Embedded Instrumentation]] ==
very closely related overlapping subjects., best handled together '''[[User:DGG| DGG]]''' ([[User talk:DGG| talk ]]) 06:06, 23 January 2015 (UTC)

:'''Strong Oppose''' Clearly different topics. Your hot tub controller is an embedded system, which might use a microprocessor with embedded self-test instrumentation in it - but that's on a chip scale, not on a system scale.  Embedded instrumentation is for testing chips - embedded systems are computers that control devices. --[[User:Wtshymanski|Wtshymanski]] ([[User talk:Wtshymanski|talk]]) 17:47, 23 January 2015 (UTC)

:'''Strong Oppose''' It appears to be closer to [[Joint Test Action Group]].  • [[User:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;">Sbmeirow</span>]] • [[User talk:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;White;">Talk</span>]] • 18:54, 23 January 2015 (UTC)

== Unsubstantiated "98 % of all microprocessors" claim? ==

The article states that "Ninety-eight percent of all microprocessors are manufactured as components of embedded systems.[4]", where [4] refers to 
http://www.embedded.com/electronics-blogs/barr-code/4027479/Real-men-program-in-C .
I was not able to find any support for the claimed fact on the referenced page. If there are no other sources to back it up, I would remove it. [[User:Fuyu5ama|Fuyu5ama]] ([[User talk:Fuyu5ama|talk]]) 13:47, 14 June 2016 (UTC)
{{talkarchive}}
==Clean up==
I have done a major trimming of the more lengthy and opinionated parts of this article. It still seems too long, but at least it no longer shows the "too long" warning from Wikipedia itself. Some parts might be better split into other articles, such as the discussion on reliability.

I expect I added lots of mistakes too, please feel free to correct :)

[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 23:47, 9 July 2006 (UTC)

==The 1st embedded system==

Regarding the first emdedded system: wasn't it actually the [[Whirlwind Computer|Whirlwind]]? -- [[User:Nixdorf|Jörgen Nixdorf]]

:Hmmm. I suppose you're thinking of [[SAGE]]. It all depends on the definition, of course, but machine room located "big iron" computers making up part of large networked systems tend to be considered as computers as such, being visibly important parts of the greater system, as opposed to "unseen parts" of an embedded system operated via a restricted UI (and display, sometimes) instead of computer terminals. So I would still say the AGC qualifies as the first real embedded system. --[[User:Wernher|Wernher]] 19:29, 2 Apr 2004 (UTC)

::Why was SAGE taken out?
::-- Yomomma <small>—The preceding [[Wikipedia:Sign your posts on talk pages|unsigned]] comment was added by [[User:66.121.167.14|66.121.167.14]] ([[User talk:66.121.167.14|talk]] • [[Special:Contributions/66.121.167.14|contribs]]) {{{2|}}}.</small><!-- [Template:Unsigned] -->

==Anti-RTOS bias?==

There seems to be a bit of anti-RTOS bias here.
Add little pro-RTOS text to bring the balance back to [[NPOV]].
-- DavidCary

There do tend to be two camps regarding the use of an RTOS in embedded systems.  However, it really comes down to the overall complexity of the system being developed.  Using an RTOS in more simplistic systems (one with very few tasks to perform and possibly with a lower powered processor or very limited memory) would probably just make the entire system slower and more complicated than it needs to be.  However, in more complex systems (with higher powered processors such as an MPC82xx), an RTOS actually makes development simpler.  I've developed extensively in both environments and am quick to take either point of view, depending on design goals of the system.
-- JimWilliams57

I added a bit to explain the rising popularity of embedded linux.
[[User:Amnonc|Amnonc]] 22:47, 16 September 2005 (UTC)

== PDA's are NOT Embedded Systems ==

PDA's (PocketPC) aren't really considered Embedded Systems anymore. They have become as generic as Personal Computer with a very large user space.   -Abe

Not sure about that.IMHO, PDAs are included on embedded systems, as they are based on ARM, M68K, MIPS, H8, PPC, ... processors. They need cross-compilation support and they are specific use circuitery. For me they are Embedded systems.    -Hector

One of the things that would indicate ''not'' being an embedded system, the ability to develop and compile software on a device, is present (at least with third-party applications) on the Palm platform; I'm not sure about others.

Many programing tools such as Python and the GCC C compiler have also been ported to Windows CE.--[[User:Tfgbd|Tfgbd]] 23:55, 18 April 2006 (UTC)

:PDAs '''are''' embedded systems if they have memory, peripherics, etc. in the same encapsulation. -- alex

::PDAs can be embedded systems if they are used for specific applications, just like PCs can be embedded computers. In my opinion a standard PDA is not an embedded system, but a general purpose computer. An embedded system is a computer (or computer platform) designed and used for a very specific purpose, and usually is part of larger system. -- Johan ([[User:193.173.66.209|193.173.66.209]]

:::Johan is definitely corect in saying that PDAs '''can''' be an embedded system. In a system that I support, we considered using a device (which the vendor was selling as a PDA platform) as the principle UI and controller of a larger embedded system. The "PDA" just happened to have the right combination of display, touch-sensitive input, computation, and communication ability needed for our application (which is '''definitely''' an embedded system).

:::On the other hand, I think one could debate whether a PDA-as-PDA doing ordinary PDA things is, itself, an embedded system; points could be made both for and against the claim.

:::[[User:Atlant|Atlant]] 14:50, 16 May 2006 (UTC)

::::The characteristic distinction the above learned discussion is apparently missing is that embedded systems are ''''Turn Key''''&mdash;whether there permutations by adding different software are moot, whether their processor and other computer hardware may or may not be general purpose is moot. ''''''To their operators', '''they have fixed application tasking''. Period, no appeal to higher court, alternative operating system, or adding programmability. Those of us who make a living creating such systems care not a whit whether some academic defininition by some inexperienced professor sans real world experience attempts to  makes an artificial distinction on the basis of some other set of attributes. ''The thing boots, does it's job, and only that job''. Voila--it's an embedded system processor in an embedded system doing an embedded system application[http://foldoc.org/foldoc.cgi?query=embedded+system&action=Search]. Such does not mean I, having the proverbial keys to the kingdom can't go in and change or update it's tasking and such, including even substituting a PDA for a [[IBM PC]]&mdash;assuming it's good to go for that particular task. e.g. Fix an XBOX with a HDD, add a minor patch, and it makes a dandy firewall&mdash;an embedded system task. // <B>[[User:Fabartus|Fra]]</B><font color="green">[[User talk:Fabartus|nkB]]</font> 17:57, 22 May 2006 (UTC)

:::::I'm quite sure that your iconic "inexperienced professor" would take issue with your creating, as you said, an artificial definition based merely upon your personal experiences.  Yes I believe that artificial academic definitions are often mundane and overly pendantic, but by the same measure, industry definitions can be equally convoluted.  Academia exists for arguing about definitions, anyway; let the standards organizations form committees to decide what's what while you fine fellows spend your valuable time making constructive edits to this article.
:::::I'd say that anybody here who tries to put so fine a point on what an "embedded system" definitively is or is not is fooling only themselves.  The discussion on how to define the term could easily be as exhaustive and fruitless as the ones we've seen before on how to define "[[computer]]".  I think the best strategy for this sort of thing is to acknowledge that definitions vary and continue writing the article to address the classes of devices that most definitions agree upon as being embedded.  It's really not worth devoting more than a sentence to PDAs to the tune of, "some classify PDAs as embedded systems while others do not". (personally I could go either way; I'd say late PDAs are less "embedded" than early-90s examples)  In other words, why devote paragraphs trying to place PDAs into a strict classification system when you could just acknowledge the rather broad meaning of the term "embedded" in this context? -- [[User:Uberpenguin|uberpenguin]] <code>@ 2006-05-22&nbsp;22:47Z</code>

::::::Side note: computer-related terms are often difficult to strictly define because their meanings can change rapidly (see the discussion on [[Talk:Computer]] from awhile back).  The FOLDOC entry that was cited was written in 1995; a time during which you'd rarely see a superscalar "general-purpose" microprocessor placed in an embedded application.  Now that sort of thing is commonplace, which only expands the class of microcomputers that may (or may not) be considered embedded. -- [[User:Uberpenguin|uberpenguin]] <code>@ 2006-05-22&nbsp;22:51Z</code>

::::Today, almost all PDA has operating system and add-remove application capability. We can also connect them to other larger system via it's I/O. I think Johan is right to say that PDA is not embedded-system in nature. To become part of embedded system, PDA should be set to specific function. for example as brain of  video game (a game board with attached naked PDA is exists in market years ago) -- [[User:Kerdip|Kerdip]] 11:46, 27 August 2006 (UTC)

==Diagnostic LEDs==
Someone added:

A common scheme is to have the electronics turn off the LED(s) at reset, whereupon the software turns it on at the first opportunity, to prove that the hardware and start-up software have performed their job so far.''

Actually, the smart play is to rig the hardware so that power-on reset '''illuminates''' all the LEDs and the software then starts changing things from that pattern. This serves as a ''lamp check'' and also tells you that +5 (or whatever) is present in the system. If the LEDs are all extinguished by power-on-reset but the software is stone cold dead, you can't tell whether it's missing +5, dead LEDs, or a software failure.

[[User:Atlant|Atlant]] 15:18, 8 May 2005 (UTC)

== Style ==

The style of this article sucks like a vacuum-cleaner. I wish I had the time to do something about it, but it will have to wait. In the meantime, I encourage everyone to not only add info, but also to improve the style and flow. Bye, [[User:Gerbrant|Shinobu]] 20:20, 26 May 2005 (UTC)

:So fix it.  If others had the time or desire to fix the article, it would have already been done. -- [[User:Uberpenguin|uberpenguin]] 18:15, 11 March 2006 (UTC)

== A copy or ...? ==

http://embedded-system.fulldisclosure.dyndns.org

Hmmm. [[User:Gerbrant|Shinobu]] 06:01, 8 August 2005 (UTC)

:Wiki content is licensed for re-use. Lots of sites mirror some or all of the article space.

:[[User:Atlant|Atlant]] 12:56, 8 August 2005 (UTC)
I know that dude... When I last looked at that link it (probably) contained a very old version of this article to the point that I couldn't tell wether we had copied the content and reworked it or something else. Since it didn't contain proper attribution (as required by GFDL) at the time I didn't know it was a mirror. These problems seem to have been fixed, so all's well. [[User:Gerbrant|Shinobu]] 15:59, 8 August 2005 (UTC)

I suggest someone can use the wikibook on embedded systems to revamp the article. A few issues and basics are better  dealt there.

== Removed reference to using MS-DOS as an embedded OS  ==

I have removed the reference to MS-DOS as an embedded OS because:

* It is not used in any embedded products I am aware of.

* It only runs on x86 processors and can not be ported

* MS-DOS's main functionality is basically a file system, so is of little use to diskless embedded systems.
[[User:Amnonc|Amnonc]] 05:49, 17 September 2005 (UTC)
::I respectfully disagree.  Some low volume embedded systems use DOS on a PC104 platform with a flash disk.  DOS lets people use cheap compilers (e.g. that wonderful port of GCC to DOS (DJGCC), Turbo C 1.0; etc.).  The debugger is a standard remote debugger via a standard PC serial port, except you can debug it on another PC.  There's an open source version of DOS now (FreeDOS).  There's direct access to hardware.  No moving parts, easy software installation, files, maybe even code in GW-BASIC and a screen interface.  You copy the software from a PC, stick the flash into the computer, and it just works (or not... but the download is painless). [[User:Ray Van De Walker]]

:::There probably should be some distinction in which DOS we are speaking of... I can think of about 8 OSes labeled "DOS" off the top of my head; running on everything from IBM midranges and mainframes to the Z80 and 8080.  The article currently says DOS, it should probably say something more like "IBM PC-DOS variants," since that's what most later OSes labeled "DOS" are/were. -- [[User:Uberpenguin|uberpenguin]] 04:28, 15 October 2005 (UTC)

== Change title to "Embedded computer" ==

"System" is a ''very'' general term that is applicable to many fields.  This article definitely talks about embedded computer systems, and I think the title should be changed to reflect that.  Thoughts? -- [[User:Uberpenguin|uberpenguin]] 04:16, 15 October 2005 (UTC)

Yes, "system" is a very general term. However it appears that [http://embedded.com/ ''Embedded Systems Design'' magazine] (formerly called ''Embedded Systems Programming'' magazine) only talks about systems that include some sort of CPU.
Would you recommend that magazine also change its title to ''Embedded Computer Systems Design'' magazine?

What other sorts of "embedded system" are you thinking of that does not include some sort of CPU?
--[[User:DavidCary|DavidCary]] 07:08, 1 November 2005 (UTC)

== "Office-style" operating system? ==

What, exactly, is meant by an "office-style" operating system, or "office work"? The section seems to talk mostly about Linux, which is by no means restricted to office or business use, and the author seems to imply that screen+keyboard == office work.

On the other hand - if this means I can justifiably say that I'm performing office work when I have UT2004 up onscreen... [[User:CamTarn|Cammy]] 17:09, 27 October 2005 (UTC)

::This might be talking about the use of WinXP etc. for ATMs and the like.

Actually this confused me too, I am of the opinion that this entire section regarding the architecture should be changed. There is no discription of a RTOS architecture (except a throw-away line and link) and I have never heard of an "office style embedded operating system" before. If the author's intention was to refer to OSes like Win CE or Embedded Linux, perhaps that should be more clear. I am not really sure if anyone has ever referred to those operating systems as "office-style" which tends to conjure up images of Office 2003 for I'm sure many people. -[[User:thomaslw|thomaslw]] 4:39 PST 2/17/06

i think that this part of the artical does not conform to the npov policy
[[User:Someguyonearth|Someguyonearth]] 19:13, 13 April 2006 (UTC)

It mentions not wanting to use an office-style operating system for things like telephones, but versions of Linux marketed as telephone hardened systems.  -[[User:RickClements|Rick]]

==Style==
Can we have a cleanup tag for this article? There's a lot which reads like a tutorial, course notes, a collection of design ideas, or as the work of one person, perhaps suitable for a wikibook rather than the encyclopedia entry.  Plus lots and lots of really strange phraseology, e.g.:
* "''There are well-known tricks to construct [safe, timely, reliable] systems: e.g. Hire a real system programmer.''"
* "''Hardware events fail about once in a trillion times''" without explanation of what that means
* ''"Developers should insist on debugging which shows the high-level language, with breakpoints and single-stepping, because these features are widely available.''"
* ''"If a design needs a screen, many designers use plain text. It's preferred because users have been reading signs for years.''" - it seems mobile telephone designers didn't get that memo...
[[User:Ojw|Ojw]] 15:40, 11 March 2006 (UTC)

:I'm not sure why you ask. I have added the tag for you. This article is in pretty bad shape, starting from the lead section (typos such as "electo-mechanical", repetitions etc.) --[[User:Gennaro Prota|Gennaro Prota]] 17:10, 11 March 2006 (UTC)

:"In the opinion of at least one author of this article" is a terrible thing to say in an encyclopaedia, as well! I don't really have the knowledge to fix this though. -- [[User:Mithent|Mithent]] 12:31, 26 April 2006 (UTC)

== Embedded system definition ==

The notions of embedded system and embedded system design have today several meanings, specific to various communities. 
* In the largest sense, an embedded systems, or embedded computing system is a computerized control system that is defined by its control function (by opposition to general-purpose computing systems). If you take a look onto embedded systems publications, you will see that nuclear plants, railway systems, or cell phones are often considered as meaningful examples.
* Few people use today the stricter sense mentioned in the article.

Example: [http://www.ece.fr/en/academics/graduate-engineering-school/courses/embedded-systems-major.php]
[[User:Dpotop|Dpotop]] 11:33, 7 April 2006 (UTC)

:This is Wikipedia, so you know what to do: [[Wikipedia:Be bold in updating pages|Be bold]] and update the article!

:[[User:Atlant|Atlant]] 11:36, 7 April 2006 (UTC)

::Just want to endorse the above point opening this section. I've made quite a few house payments designing hardware special purpose to a task but utilizing a stripped down [[IBM PC]] as a controller. Usually, on the factory floor, they have neither keyboard nor disk access, and there have been the occasional black box variant sans display monitor, utilizing the dedicated control hardware for that. Ditto applications like airport security scanning equipment. Utilizing a special purpose CPU board is frequently less cost effective than the cheap mass produced PC. <B>[[User:Fabartus|Fra]]</B><font color="green">[[User talk:Fabartus|nkB]]</font> 17:37, 22 May 2006 (UTC)

==REMOVING POV Template==
After scanning this article, I see no basis for the above'' 'In your Face' ''template to remain. It seems like the above talk indicates it was dealt with long ago, and no-one had the gumption to remove it. If I missed something&mdash;I'm sorry&mdash; by all means, put it back, but do so with a detailed renewed assesment of why you are doing so. The Anti-RTOS bias last September, seems a bit weak as a reason for '''such a damning tag'''.  Best regards, <B>[[User:Fabartus|Fra]]</B><font color="green">[[User talk:Fabartus|nkB]]</font> 17:37, 22 May 2006 (UTC)

==Sentence under Characteristics does not make sense===
The sentence I noticed reads :
"Engineers minimizeapproach is used to select hardware that is just “good enough” to implement the necessary functions."
I'm changing this to read :
"Engineers typically select hardware that is just “good enough” to implement the necessary functions."
==Links deleted - Why?==

This "59.93.95.186" removed almost all of the links in the body of the article with zero comment. Nobody noticed and there are now many revisions since then. This will require a serious effort to recover the lost information. Example: most of the examples are no longer linked. Some misguided attempt at improving style?

:I have restored most of the links from an old version. And the nice photo of the Apollo guidance computer :) [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 15:20, 14 February 2007 (UTC)

==ICD vs ICE deleted why?==
They are not essentially the same.  One is an external device connected to the pins of the processor while the other uses internal logic to perform a similar task.  The ICE does not give true access to internal memory mapped register of the processor, while the ICD does.  They are quite different and should not be confused with each other.  An ice does not connect via JTAG or NEXUS it connects via the address/data and control lines of the processor.
:Please sign your discusion edits with 4 tildes so we know who you are. I deleted the ICD because from the description you gave, it seems FUNCTIONALLY very similar to an ICE and the differences are only minor technical differences. We don't need to have every detail about tools for embedded systems. There are doubtless hundreds of other tools with minor differences. Also, I could not find any entry on Wikipedia about ICD.[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 09:45, 16 February 2007 (UTC)
::No idea what you mean by 4 tildes [[User:EM1SS&CSE|EM1SS&amp;CSE]] 15:34, 19 February 2007 (UTC) does what?  
:::Hey, you did it :) It puts your Wikipedia user name and the date in, as you can see now in the discussion page. See [[Sign your posts on talk pages]] for more info. Personally the wiki discussion process seems extremely clumsy but thats how it is for now...[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 22:43, 19 February 2007 (UTC)
::Functionally the ICE and ICD are quite different.  
:::OK. Lets try to clarify the clear distinction. An ICD connects to real hardware to run a debugger, while an ICE replaces the real CPU hardware - is that it? There should probably be some discussion of this elsewhere in WP - perhaps under ICE.[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 22:43, 19 February 2007 (UTC)
::::After review, it seems to me an ICD is a special case of a [[debugger]]. Note that there is already a link to debugger in the first paragraph.[[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 22:51, 19 February 2007 (UTC) Perhaps ICD warrants a new section in debugger? What do you think?
::::: In the tools section should list 'various debugging methods are available’.  Then in the debug section cover ICD/ICE and software background debuggers (like remote GDB).  This i think would make sense structurally.  Your thoughts? [[User:EM1SS&CSE|EM1SS&amp;CSE]] 20:28, 20 February 2007 (UTC)
::::::Good idea. Considering how much of a challenge debugging embedded stuff can be, it needs it's own section. OK ... feel free or I will try later ... Thanks. And especially, thanks for opening a discussion ... a lot of this article has been edited without any discussion, which is why I reverted many things without much qualm. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 11:55, 21 February 2007 (UTC)
:::::::OK, I have restored ICD as a separate entry and generally expanded debugging. Tried to describe the relative benefits as I understand them. OK? [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 09:41, 1 May 2007 (UTC)

==Embedded System Scaling deleted why?==
There are very different applications of embedded systems they can not and should not be treated the same. I’m unclear why this was deleted.
:Your description was far too technical for a wikipedia article. I could barely understand the point you were trying to make, and I work with embedded systems (sometimes). In addition, it is obvious from the introductory section about different (physical) sizes and applications of ES that they are going to be different. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]]

Part of the problem is that this article is basically too long. It has a lot of technical detail and adding more will make it less useful. Possibly, slimming down some of the lengthy discussion about architectures would help.

==Clean-up?==

OK, maybe this article still needs clean up. However, the tag alone is not all that helpful without some specific suggestions. Please go ahead and make some, or I suggest we remove the tag. 

I archived the talk page so we can start with a clean slate. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 11:17, 13 October 2006 (UTC)
:Probably a down to earth explanation would work better.
::Specific ideas please. In general Wikipedia aims for "down to earth" explanations, but what's there seems reasonable. And please sign your discussion edits with four tildes so it shows your name. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 14:54, 3 January 2007 (UTC)

==Start with this Paragraph==
Replace this paragraph: Programmable controllers do not always come is separate blocks. Very often they are build in, in some devices which can be classified as field devices. They can be integraded into the field devices "housing", and even to be a part of a circuit board of the field device. That is why such systems are called embeded device.

With this one: Programmable controllers do not always come is separate blocks. Very often they are built into field devices. For example, controllers can be integrated with the field device's "housing" or incorporated into the circuit board of the field device--giving rise to the designation, "embedded"

[[User:65.34.238.234|65.34.238.234]] 22:33, 20 December 2006 (UTC)Steve R.

:I removed most of this hard-to-read sentence, since it doesn't explain it's terms and really duplicates text in other sections. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 15:20, 14 February 2007 (UTC)

== External link: OK to post ESD magazine? ==

I'm the managing editor of Embedded Systems Design magazine (formerly known as Embedded Systems Programming). The magazine has been around for 20 years and is a well-respected, popular trade journal devoted to technical articles on creating embedded systems.  I'd like to post http://www.embedded.com in the external links section of the embedded system entry, but it's a conflict of interest for me to do so. That's why I'm asking you for permission. The magazine's web site is free (as is the print magazine, to qualified subscribers). The web site has a good search feature so users can look by topic or author. Most of our articles are archived there.

Also of interest is the Embedded Systems Dictionary by Jack Ganssle and Michael Barr (a columnist and a former editor in chief, respectively).   Here's a link to it on Michael Barr's web site: http://www.netrino.com/Books/Dictionary/index.html    CMP (the publisher of ESD magazine) no longer owns the rights to this book, so we have no connection with it other than Jack Ganssle is still one of our columnists.

Any thoughts? [[User:Srambo|Srambo]] 22:58, 20 December 2006 (UTC)

:Well it seems to be there now. Unfortunately this article is getting too heavy on the links and indeed content (again). Remember, more is not always better! But I'm not going to attempt to tidy things up again. [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 14:54, 3 January 2007 (UTC)

== PDA's are (still) NOT Embedded Systems (discussion reloaded) ==

After sleeping over it several times I still don't see a single reasonable argument why a PDA (e.g. my old beloved Palm 505) should be an embedded system. OK, it was "embedded" in my life & in my left shirt pocket. But was it embedded in anything else? I don't think so. Also, the fact that in a PDA all components of a computer (CPU, Memory, I/O) are embedded in one box doesn't make it an embedded system. The external reference [http://foldoc.org/foldoc.cgi?query=embedded+system&action=Search] cited by FrankB in the old discussion to support why PDA's should be embedded systems does in fact support the contrary. The definition there is pretty strait forward: '''''"Hardware and software which forms a component of some larger system''' and which is expected to function without human intervention."'' Even if the second prong (human intervention) is debatable, a PDA (by itself, of course, we are not discussing PDAs integrated in a Robot...) - like it or not - is not a component physically integrated of ''some larger system''. If we drop this requirement, the definition gets empty and ''any'' computer is an embedded system which is absurd. None of the earliest PDAs ([[Apple Newton|Apple's Newton]], [http://sandbox.xerox.com/parctab Xerox's PARCTAB], [[Psion Organiser|Psion]]) or a [[OQO]] have ever been categorized as embedded systems except here. Check on the respective Wikipedia sites as well their producers websites. Other distinctions like "general- v. special-purpose", "components used", "software used" are not critical to draw the line. A cell phone whose cell phone features dominate function, design & use may just scrape through as an embedded system. However, newer cell phones which also can be used as MP3 player, E-Mail/www-client, games, calculator, calendar, adressbook, etc, like a Treo or other Smartphones are already over the edge. If the line gets blurry, it's here! Our friends in the [[de:Eingebettetes System|German]], Spanish, French and [[it:Sistema embedded|Italian]] edition of Wikipedia adhere - as I do - to a strait forward definition and don't mix things. Some other versions most likely - and sadly enough - just copied from the English version. Let's get out of the "group dynamics"-trap and delete para 2! [[User:Dugong|Dugong]] 02:30, 22 March 2007 (UTC)
:Basically, I agree. Perhaps leave a short note saying something like: "Handheld computers may share some elements such as operating systems, microprocessors, and storage technologies, but are not truly embedded systems themselves.". [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 09:34, 6 April 2007 (UTC)
::OK, I have done this. Is it OK? [[User:Aaron Lawrence|Aaron Lawrence]] 09:41, 1 May 2007 (UTC)

== Proposed merge from Embedded System Design in an FPGA ==

The article [[Embedded System Design in an FPGA]] appears to contain a mix of advocacy that is [[WP:NOT|not appropriate for Wikipedia]], and useful factual information which is (IMHO) better suited to being merged into this article. --[[User:Allan McInnes|Allan McInnes]] <small>([[User talk:Allan McInnes|talk]])</small> 01:57, 21 April 2007 (UTC)
:I don't think they should be merged. Embedded systems is a very large scope to start with, having FPGA related stuff in its own article reduces clutter. &mdash; <span style="text-decoration: none;">[[User:RevRagnarok|<font color="#696969">RevRagnarok</font>]] <sup>[[User_talk:RevRagnarok |Talk]] [[Special:Contributions/RevRagnarok|Contrib]]</sup></span> 04:27, 21 April 2007 (UTC)
::There's already a fairly comprehensive article on [[FPGA]]s, which has significant overlap with the [[Embedded System Design in an FPGA]] article. Once you eliminate that overlapping material, there's not much left of the original [[Embedded System Design in an FPGA]] article, and I don't think that what little is left would contribute much "clutter" to this article. --[[User:Allan McInnes|Allan McInnes]] <small>([[User talk:Allan McInnes|talk]])</small> 05:32, 21 April 2007 (UTC)
