{{WikiProject Computing |class=Start |importance= |network=yes |network-importance=}}
{{Copied |from=Network simulator |from_oldid=oldid=456985303 |to=Network simulation |to_diff=467270722 |to_oldid=463601728 |date=00:41, 23 December 2011}}

==Linkfarm==
The current External links section is just a list of links to network simulation software providers, violating WP:SPAM and WP:NOT#LINK.  Isn't there something that meets [[WP:EL]] that could be there instead? --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] 15:16, 8 May 2007 (UTC)
:I removed all the inappropriate external links. --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] 18:40, 9 May 2007 (UTC)

Looks like we disagree on what are appropriate for the External links section.  Summarizing my edits: 
*[http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns NS2 - Free, Open Source ] - '''Simulation software site'''
*[http://www.omnetpp.org/ OMNeT++] - '''Simulation software site'''
*[http://www.shunra.com/ Shunra] - '''SPAM'''
*[http://www.tetcos.com/ NetSim] - '''SPAM'''
*[http://www.opnet.com/ OPNET] - '''SPAM'''
*[http://www.qualnet.com/ QualNet], formerly [http://pcl.cs.ucla.edu/projects/glomosim/ GloMoSim] - '''Simulation software site''' with a historical link as well.
None of these links belong per [[WP:EL]], [[WP:SPAM]], and [[WP:NOT#LINK]], especially those I see as being spam.  Instead we should have links to articles about network simulation.
--[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] 22:38, 10 May 2007 (UTC)

Please do not add any additional external links. There are currently 5 external links under network simultion software.
If you need to add any further links, kindly mention about them in the discussion page. They will be added only if consensus is got among regular members.

Durnitz

:I think that the link to OPNET is very appropriate.  When I think of network simulation, I immediately think of NS2 and OPNET.  It would be better to link to [[OPNET]], but that article doesn't exist yet. [[WP:NOT#LINK]] says pages should not be only/primarily link farms -- that article has substantial content other than these useful links. $0.02 [[User:LachlanA|LachlanA]] 01:48, 30 July 2007 (UTC)


:The links marked as spam are certainly valid as network simulations. Ronz maybe biased against them on the order that they are not free, open-source, nor an open-source derivative. Having used most of these software, these applications are just as relevant to the page as a list of software with the capabilities listed. However, adding pages for major pieces of software (such as Qualnet and OPNet) may have merit and provide more information than the company websites.

Chris  <small>—The preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment was added by [[Special:Contributions/{{{IP|{{{User|192.91.147.35}}}}}}|{{{IP|{{{User|192.91.147.35}}}}}}]] ([[User talk:{{{IP|{{{User|192.91.147.35}}}}}}|talk]]) {{{Time|19:11, August 21, 2007 (UTC)}}}</small><!-- Template:UnsignedIP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

I removed the list again, after another link was added.  Again, I think this is clear-cut.  If we want to make a list of network simulators, we should follow [[WP:LIST]] --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] 23:29, 30 October 2007 (UTC)

:I removed it yet again. --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] ([[User talk:Ronz|talk]]) 14:39, 19 August 2008 (UTC)
::Removed again. --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] ([[User talk:Ronz|talk]]) 01:59, 23 October 2008 (UTC)
:::Removed again.  Going to start blacklisting the links. --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] ([[User talk:Ronz|talk]]) 02:21, 20 May 2009 (UTC)

::::Thanks for keeping the article clean from external links. The external link should be placed in the article about the network simulator, and not here.
::::Personally I have no problem with intra-wiki links from this article to articles about specific network simulators. If a network simulator is notable enough for its own article, then it is notable enough for mentioning here. Especially if the [[Network simulation]] article is merged with [[Network simulator]] article, as I have suggested, the article should contain a list of network simulators that have their own wp articles. [[User:Mange01|Mange01]] ([[User talk:Mange01|talk]]) 17:33, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
:::::Yes, a list of simulators that have their own article already could be useful. --[[User:Ronz|Ronz]] ([[User talk:Ronz|talk]]) 17:51, 20 May 2009 (UTC)
