{{WikiProject Computing|class=List|importance=Mid|software=yes}}
== Editing the Definition ==
Hello there,

In my opinion, definition presented in Utility software section is more about 'what is Utility software' than for 'what purpose it is made'. Hence, I would rephrase it and put it this way: "Utility software is a program specifically designed to help manage and tune system or application software." While it is a short description it gives a general idea of utility's software purpose as well as ability to expand its description further by integrating specific functions or tasks performed by aforementioned software.

Best regards,
Vitas
Lithuania
<span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/213.197.169.162|213.197.169.162]] ([[User talk:213.197.169.162|talk]]) 11:52, 17 June 2005 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP -->

:That does sound like a better definition, and I'll be happy to implement it. My own opinion is that both questions stated above should be answered as clearly as possible in the article.
:[[User:InsideLine|InsideLine]] 12:11, 17 October 2006 (UTC)

== utility software ==
Can you please make your research more understandable, with many facts that it? <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/222.126.29.46|222.126.29.46]] ([[User talk:222.126.29.46|talk]]) 11:41, 13 February 2007 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP -->
:I read the revised defination of utility software, I recommend addition at the revised defination "which benefit both technical as well as non-technical users" The reason behind my recommendation is inclusion of system and application software terms.

:Regrds
:Aizof  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/203.223.165.82|203.223.165.82]] ([[User talk:203.223.165.82|talk]]) 08:17, 6 September 2011 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

I'm very happy to read [[User:Marko Kur|Marko Kur]] ([[User talk:Marko Kur|talk]]) 21:37, 16 June 2018 (UTC)

Thanks [[User:Marko Kur|Marko Kur]] ([[User talk:Marko Kur|talk]]) 21:38, 16 June 2018 (UTC)

== citations needed ==

I feel this is more of a list-class article, and doesn't need additional citations. [[User:Peter Flass|Peter Flass]] ([[User talk:Peter Flass|talk]]) 20:23, 7 February 2019 (UTC)
:Totally agree. Perhaps the introductory discussion could do with another cite or two, but the current banner recently added by Hildeaof implies that each bullet point requires a ref - which is Just Silly, as all of them are existing articles. -[[User:Snori|Snori]] ([[User talk:Snori|talk]]) 21:42, 7 February 2019 (UTC)
