{{WikiProject Google|class=start|importance=Mid|}}
{{Alphabet Task Force|class=start|importance=High}}

== Article notability and band ==

I was surprised to see this here, as it might not meet the Wikipedia criteria for notability.  The previous developer conferences (also mentioned in this article) don't have articles.  However, these Google developer conferences have grown since the first two, as this is the first to both spread over two days and charge a registration fee.

I also added mention of a concert by [[Flight of the Conchords]] scheduled by Google as part of the conference.  There is no public reference I can find of this, other than a mass E-mail sent by Google on April 21 to all registered attendees.  Here is a quote:

<blockquote>
After Hours with Flight of the Conchords: Plan to attend our After Hours event at the end of the first day, May 28. It will be a great way to unwind, meet other developers, and listen to New Zealand's fourth most popular digi-folk parody band.
</blockquote>

--[[User:Jeffrey Sharkey|Jeffrey Sharkey]] ([[User talk:Jeffrey Sharkey|talk]]) 06:06, 28 April 2008 (UTC)

== Sandboxing the 2013 I/O section ==

===2013 (May 15–17, 2013)===
It was held at [[Moscone Center]], [[San Francisco]] and ran from May 15 until May 17, 2013. The registration opened on March 13, 2013 at 7:00 AM PDT (GMT-7).<ref name="google1"/>

It took only 49 minutes for all the $900 (or $300 for school students and faculty) tickets to get sold out, even with the added requirement that registrants must have both Google+ and Google Wallet accounts.<ref>{{cite web|author=Wednesday, March 13th, 2013 |url=http://techcrunch.com/2013/03/13/google-io-2013-registration-sells-out-in-49-minutes-as-users-report-problems-early-on-making-payments/ |title=Google I/O 2013 Registration Sells Out In 49 Minutes As Users Report Problems Early On Making Payments |publisher=TechCrunch |date=2013-03-13 |accessdate=2013-05-10}}</ref>

Google gave away the following hardware to attendees:
* The [[Chromebook Pixel]]

====Day 1====
* Google Edition 
* Google Play Games
* Google Play Music All Access
* Android Studio
* Google Play for Education
* Google Hangout
* New Google+ Stream Redesign

[[User:Nicereddy|Nicereddy]] ([[User talk:Nicereddy|talk]]) 17:21, 15 May 2013 (UTC)

{{reflist-talk}}

== External links modified ==

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 2 external links on [[Google I/O]]. Please take a moment to review [https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?diff=prev&oldid=771726192 my edit]. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit [[User:Cyberpower678/FaQs#InternetArchiveBot|this simple FaQ]] for additional information. I made the following changes:
*Added archive https://web.archive.org/web/20130510203334/https://developers.google.com/events/io/ to https://developers.google.com/events/io/
*Added archive https://web.archive.org/web/20130709144346/http://gadgetronica.com/news/google-io-2012-day-1/ to http://gadgetronica.com/news/google-io-2012-day-1/

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

{{sourcecheck|checked=false|needhelp=}}

Cheers.—[[User:InternetArchiveBot|'''<span style="color:darkgrey;font-family:monospace">InternetArchiveBot</span>''']] <span style="color:green;font-family:Rockwell">([[User talk:InternetArchiveBot|Report bug]])</span> 04:31, 23 March 2017 (UTC)

== Source for 2018 date? ==

What is the source for the 2018 I/O date? [[User:Ds77|Ds77]] ([[User talk:Ds77|talk]]) 07:20, 15 January 2018 (UTC)
