{{WikiProjectBannerShell|1=
{{WikiProject Google|class=C|importance=mid|}}
{{WikiProject Computing|class=C|importance=low}}
{{WikiProject Internet|class=C|importance=low}}
{{Alphabet Task Force|class=C|importance=Top}}
}}

== Let's cite sources ==
{{hidden begin|title= Here are some sample templates to use (you're welcome) |titlestyle= background:pink;}}
{{main|WP:CITE}}
citing some website:<br />
<nowiki><ref name=" ">  {{cite web </nowiki><br />
<nowiki>| url=  </nowiki><br />
<nowiki>| title= </nowiki> <br />
<nowiki>| publisher=  </nowiki><br />
<nowiki>}} </ref></nowiki><br />
<br />

citing an actual newspaper or magazine:<br />
<nowiki> <ref name=" "> </nowiki>
{{cite news &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;last= &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;first= &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;url= &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;title= &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;publisher= &nbsp;<br />
|&nbsp;date= &nbsp;<br />
}}
<nowiki> </ref> </nowiki>
{{hidden end}}
[[User:Heroeswithmetaphors|Heroeswithmetaphors]] ([[User talk:Heroeswithmetaphors|talk]]) 16:18, 25 March 2010 (UTC)

== Cost section not clear ==

Is it Google or will it be the end users who will pay for the connection?[[User:Jasper Deng|Jasper Deng]] ([[User talk:Jasper Deng|talk]]) 05:01, 5 April 2010 (UTC)

@Jasper: "We plan to offer ultra high-speed Internet access directly to consumers at an affordable price. We look forward to sharing more information as we begin to develop more specific plans." --from http://googlefiberblog.blogspot.com/. [[User:Mushabisi|Mushabisi]] ([[User talk:Mushabisi|talk]]) 04:42, 28 July 2011 (UTC)

== possible locations list ==

in the possible locations list, it says "The following communities have submitted a Google Fiber bid:" and lists some communities.
I'm confused, does this mean that JUST those communities have submitted proposals or that those are just SOME of the communities that have submitted proposals? I have a feeling it might be the latter (mostly because earlier in the article it says something about 1,100 communities) but wasn't clear to me so i didn't change it.  <small><span class="autosigned">—Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[User:Stoopkitty|Stoopkitty]] ([[User talk:Stoopkitty|talk]] • [[Special:Contributions/Stoopkitty|contribs]]) 00:56, 9 June 2010 (UTC)</span></small><!-- Template:Unsigned --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

: It does not mean only those communities. I have edited the list header to reflect this. [[User:Rabbitfang|Rabbitfang]] ([[User talk:Rabbitfang|talk]]) 04:10, 20 June 2010 (UTC)


Reno is also submitted  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">—Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/134.197.122.47|134.197.122.47]] ([[User talk:134.197.122.47|talk]]) 18:11, 17 November 2010 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:UnsignedIP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

I really don't know where to put this but in a search to sign up for the free service with an aim in eventually replacing Comcast with Google Fiber, guess what?  DuckDuckGo does NOT provide a sign up page that is easily found.  Is it too much to ask that it be provided up front and center?  Fiber.google.com is my guess.  Does Google intend to change it forever more like everybody else?  I am sorry but I see the fiber connector in my apartment and wish to sign up.  But a login is required to get on?  How does that affect using a broadband router for my three devices, et cetera, et cetera? [[User:Hhhobbit|hhhobbit]] ([[User talk:Hhhobbit|talk]])  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned"> — Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|undated]] comment added 22:24, 5 February 2015 (UTC)</span><!--Template:Undated--> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== Simple math ==

The article claims that broadband speeds of 1 gigabit per second are about 100 times faster than what "most Americans" have (whatever that means).  It then goes on to say that the average american has a broadband speed of 4 megabits per second.  Well, 1Gbps is actually considerably more than 100 times faster than 4Mbps.  It's actually 256 times faster.  Although, the ambiguity of the "most Americans" quasi-statistic makes it unclear if "most Americans" is different from "the average American".  I think some clarification is needed here.  Also, the source listed for this sentence does not mention anything about proposed speeds.
For more information about google fiber..visit..http://www.techienity.com/google-fiber-extremist-speed-internet/
  [[User:Snottywong|<span style="font:13px 'Copperplate Gothic Light';border:#AAAACC 1px inset;background-color:#EEEEFE;color=#648113">Snotty<font color="#994400">Wong</font></span>]]&nbsp;<sup><small>[[User talk:Snottywong|chat]]</small></sup> 01:43, 28 November 2010 (UTC)
:I agree that it's ambiguous. If you don't think it belongs, delete it.[[User:Jasper Deng|Jasper Deng]] ([[User talk:Jasper Deng|talk]]) 02:51, 12 January 2011 (UTC)
::"What most Americans have" would best be known from here: [http://www.netindex.com NetIndex.com]. <span style="font-weight:bold; text-shadow:gray 0.1em 0.1em 0.1em; class=texhtml">[[User:Rickinasia|₪Rick]]<small>n</small>[[User talk:Rickinasia|Asia₪]]</span> 18:27, 25 November 2012 (UTC)

==List==
I tried to add the whole list from google since the one there is incomplete.  Since a user just deleted the list someone else can put it back so I can't be accused of doing an edit war. I don't know why they don't want the article to be informative, and I don't know why if they did not like the list I put up they couldn't just make it better instead of just deleting it.  <small><span class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[User:7y7y7u|7y7y7u]] ([[User talk:7y7y7u|talk]] • [[Special:Contributions/7y7y7u|contribs]]) 23:57, 12 February 2011 (UTC)</span></small><!-- Template:Unsigned --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->
:I'd like to have the list expanded, but Wikipedia uses '''third-party''' sources too. The syntax you used was incorrect-each new bullet is started with * right before the bullet's text. You use an extra * if you want a sub-bullet. Two lists would be cumbersome, and that's the reason it was deleted. However, accusing us wrongly of wanting the article to be not informative is strongly discouraged.
<br>
:Comments on talk pages are headed with ==<subject>==, and you should sign your comments by typing four tildes immediately after.
<br>
:[[User:Jasper Deng|Jasper Deng]] ([[User talk:Jasper Deng|talk]]) 02:08, 13 February 2011 (UTC)

Jasper thanks for not biting. Nakon decided to bite by just deleting and not being collaborative or discussing, don't get why they weren't edit warring since they were being destructive rather than constructive. Well, I tried. Good luck. [[User:7y7y7u|7y7y7u]] ([[User talk:7y7y7u|talk]]) 14:54, 13 February 2011 (UTC)
:Nakon and I were following Wikipedia's rules on formatting. We both gave clear reasons why we deleted the content. I however have to say, your edits here can't be considered constructive given that they don't follow Wikipedia's policies. Concerning edit wars, I don't think Nakon should have any responsibility for them given that he was merely following Wikipedia policy. See [[WP:Welcome]] for some details.[[User:Jasper Deng|Jasper Deng]] ([[User talk:Jasper Deng|talk]]) 18:31, 13 February 2011 (UTC)

== Google Fiber, Cloud computing, and Chrome OS ==

In my view, all of these are [http://www.wired.com/cloudline/2012/07/google-fiber-cloud-happiness/ connected]. I would suggest a new section talking about how they are interlinked.  [[User:Casprings|Casprings]] ([[User talk:Casprings|talk]]) 18:38, 29 July 2012 (UTC)

== Privacy concerns? ==


Anyone have any information re: how & to what extent Google will collect user data and/or analyze and/or resell that data?  Obvious answer: "as much as possible," but does anyone have anything more specific?  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/71.176.50.169|71.176.50.169]] ([[User talk:71.176.50.169|talk]]) 00:53, 25 November 2012 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== Wireless Router? ==

It is stated that a router is "included with all packages" but that isn't one of the things listed in the included hardware above. Which is it? Does a router come with the service?  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/108.167.79.105|108.167.79.105]] ([[User talk:108.167.79.105|talk]]) 20:28, 4 April 2013 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

: The Network Box is a wireless router.  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/2001:470:1F10:1BC:0:0:0:2|2001:470:1F10:1BC:0:0:0:2]] ([[User talk:2001:470:1F10:1BC:0:0:0:2|talk]]) 02:33, 13 April 2013 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== Coming to Austin ==
Looks like Austin, Texas is Google's next build-out target:

http://www.theverge.com/2013/4/5/4187994/google-fiber-could-expand-to-austin-as-city-preps-for-joint-announcement

...I'll let you guys update the article...it's clearly not a 100% confirmed certainty yet. [[User:SteveBaker|SteveBaker]] ([[User talk:SteveBaker|talk]]) 12:50, 8 April 2013 (UTC)

== Google Fiber in San Francisco ==
No mention of San Francisco on the official wiki list, but it is a target for Google Fiber.
https://fiber.google.com/cities/sanfrancisco/

This is interestingly going to be ran under a different model, instead of a straight up infrastructure build out, and just leveraging existing lines.  <small class="autosigned">—&nbsp;Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/70.36.144.16|70.36.144.16]] ([[User talk:70.36.144.16|talk]]) 07:36, 16 March 2016 (UTC)</small><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== Google Fiber in Provo. ==
Here's another Wikipedia article that may shed more light on the Provo deal.  [[iProvo]]
:Link added. Thanks! [[User:K8 fan|K8 fan]] ([[User talk:K8 fan|talk]]) 03:11, 19 April 2013 (UTC)

== Internet vs. internet in this article ==

[[User:Rreagan007]] and I have been making edits to change between internet and Internet through a couple rounds of edits and reverts now. My last revert included the edit summary 'Internet is a proper noun and so should be capitalized' and his last revert said 'whether "internet" is a common or proper noun is disputed [[Capitalization of "Internet"]] '. I agree that the uncapitalized version is coming into more common use. But, while we can't say that either style is definitively right or wrong, I think that we should try to be consistent across English Wikipedia articles and that capitalizing Internet is preferred. If you look at the main [[Internet]] article for example, you'll see "Internet" rather than "internet". The same is true for most other Wikipedia articles that talk about the Internet. I'll note that the Google fiber website capitalizes Internet. The ''Chicago Manual of Style'' (16th Edition) includes this example in section 7.76: "Internet protocol (IP); the Internet; the net; an internet". So, I'll wait a few days to see if this note draws any helpful comments. Depending on what develops, I may switch things back to use capital I Internet. --[[User:W163|Jeff Ogden (W163)]] ([[User talk:W163|talk]]) 17:41, 16 September 2013 (UTC)
:I agree with you that a consistent usage across English Wikipedia would be good. Perhaps you can start a thread about this topic on a Manual of Style talk page to get a broader discussion going about this. [[User:Rreagan007|Rreagan007]] ([[User talk:Rreagan007|talk]]) 17:47, 16 September 2013 (UTC)

== Provo info out of date ==

The article describes "plans underway" for Austin and Provo. Austin is still that way, but Provo is now online. Go to fiber.google.com. It's there.  <span style="font-size: smaller;" class="autosigned">— Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/63.248.151.176|63.248.151.176]] ([[User talk:63.248.151.176|talk]]) 03:34, 16 January 2014 (UTC)</span><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== Competitors after Google Fiber announce they are coming to town ==

Here is a chart from Time-Warner that shows their cable internet speeds before and after Google Fiber announced they were coming to [[Charlotte, North Carolina]].  • [[User:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;">Sbmeirow</span>]] • [[User talk:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;White;">Talk</span>]] • 09:22, 14 April 2015 (UTC)

All numbers in Mbps: http://www.timewarnercable.com/content/dam/residential/images/Enjoy/better-twc/SpeedChart.png
* 2/1 to 3/1 - Everyday Low Price plan.
* 3/1 to 10/1 - Basic plan.
* 15/1 to 50/5 - Extreme plan.
* 20/2 to 100/10 - Ultimate 100 plan.
* 30/5 to 200/20 - Ultimate 200 plan.
* 100/5 to 300/20 - Ultimate 300 plan.

== PR vs actual installs ==

The article needs to be reviewed for stuff that was announced with completion dates that are now in the past.  Five years on, Google Fiber is only in parts of three small cities. --[[User:Nagle|John Nagle]] ([[User talk:Nagle|talk]]) 18:12, 5 August 2015 (UTC)

== Services table ==

Are the colors in the table under the Services section supposed to mean anything? There's no legend. Without any such description, the colors are pretty useless. Green seems to suggest something good, that customers would desire. Red seems to indicate a warning about the service, something that customers should beware of. It's not clear what yellow is supposed to mean. Without any description of their meaning, I lean toward removing the colors completely. [[User:SeanAhern|SeanAhern]] ([[User talk:SeanAhern|talk]]) 12:34, 7 October 2015 (UTC)

:After hearing no objection for over a month, I have made the change. [[User:SeanAhern|SeanAhern]] ([[User talk:SeanAhern|talk]]) 13:52, 23 November 2015 (UTC)
::Good move. Those colors had no visible meaning. [[User:Nagle|John Nagle]] ([[User talk:Nagle|talk]]) 07:29, 25 November 2015 (UTC)

== Incorrect: "As of March 2015, Google Fiber had 27,000 television subscribers' ==

The article was printed in 2015 but the TV subscription data that Moffett gathered was from end of 2014 data.  So is should read "As of end of 2014, Google Fiber had 29,867 TV subs".  

http://www.multichannel.com/news/technology/google-fiber-ended-2014-29867-tv-subs-report/388806

<small class="autosigned">—&nbsp;Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/2605:A601:4EA:600:E080:8364:9327:F041|2605:A601:4EA:600:E080:8364:9327:F041]] ([[User talk:2605:A601:4EA:600:E080:8364:9327:F041|talk]]) 22:38, 29 January 2016 (UTC)</small><!-- Template:Unsigned IP --> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->

== External links modified ==

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just added archive links to {{plural:1|one external link|1 external links}} on [[Google Fiber]]. Please take a moment to review [https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?diff=prev&oldid=702462861 my edit]. If necessary, add {{tlx|cbignore}} after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add {{tlx|nobots|deny{{=}}InternetArchiveBot}} to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:
*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20141209174649/https://www.yadwire.com/google-fiber-communities/ to https://www.yadwire.com/google-fiber-communities/

When you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.

{{sourcecheck|checked=true}}

Cheers.—[[User:Cyberbot II|<sup style="color:green;font-family:Courier">cyberbot II]]<small><sub style="margin-left:-14.9ex;color:green;font-family:Comic Sans MS">[[User talk:Cyberbot II|<span style="color:green">Talk to my owner]]:Online</sub></small> 19:01, 30 January 2016 (UTC)

== External links modified ==

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just added archive links to {{plural:1|one external link|1 external links}} on [[Google Fiber]]. Please take a moment to review [https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?diff=prev&oldid=712485581 my edit]. You may add {{tlx|cbignore}} after the link to keep me from modifying it, if I keep adding bad data, but formatting bugs should be reported instead. Alternatively, you can add {{tlx|nobots|deny{{=}}InternetArchiveBot}} to keep me off the page altogether, but should be used as a last resort. I made the following changes:
*Attempted to fix sourcing for http://www.wearefeelinglucky.com/

When you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' or '''failed''' to let others know (documentation at {{tlx|Sourcecheck}}).

{{sourcecheck|checked=false}}

Cheers.—[[User:Cyberbot II|<sup style="color:green;font-family:Courier">cyberbot II]]<small><sub style="margin-left:-14.9ex;color:green;font-family:Comic Sans MS">[[User talk:Cyberbot II|<span style="color:green">Talk to my owner]]:Online</sub></small> 10:55, 29 March 2016 (UTC)

== Text colors on Map ==

In the future when someone updates the map, please don't use yellow because the color contrast sucks for reading text.  • [[User:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;">Sbmeirow</span>]] • [[User talk:Sbmeirow|<span style="color:#8D38C9;White;">Talk</span>]] • 00:00, 26 August 2016 (UTC)

== Google ==

I just wrote this for fun
loll ==  <!-- Template:Unsigned IP --><small class="autosigned">—&nbsp;Preceding [[Wikipedia:Signatures|unsigned]] comment added by [[Special:Contributions/96.83.144.137|96.83.144.137]] ([[User talk:96.83.144.137#top|talk]]) 13:53, 10 April 2017 (UTC)</small> <!--Autosigned by SineBot-->
